So there’s this story about the novelists
Kurt Vonnegut and Joseph Heller
attending a party together, by the way
good morning Hank it’s Tuesday.
The party’s an extremely lavish affair
hosted by a billionaire and Vonnegut
says to Heller, “Joe isn’t it funny that
our host makes more money in a day
than you ever made from your beloved
bestselling novel Catch 22?” and
Heller is like “yeah that is funny,
but I have something our host will
never have.” And Vonnegut says
“what’s that?” and Heller says, “enough.”
I’ve used this story for years to
remind myself that I have enough,
but also to remind me that most
people on Earth do not have
enough. Many people do not have
enough food, or enough clean water,
and most people do not have enough
savings or enough to access
excellent medical care. But in my
experience, even those of us who
do have enough, often feel as if we
don’t. There’s always something missing,
more security, or power, or money
that stands between us and true
enough-ness. For me it’s always
been about security. The feeling I
am trying to avoid all the time is
precarity, the feeling of being close
to the edge and not having a say
in whether I go over it. But of course,
having adequate distance from
precarity turns out to be, one,
impossible, and two, insofar as it
is possible, actually a pretty
terrible idea. Let’s start with
why it’s impossible.
Wealth and privilege insulate people
from many kinds of precarity in
profoundly unjust ways and I
think that is important to acknowledge,
but ultimately there is no getting
around the big precarity which is that
I love and everyone I love will die.
When I was young I thought I
could solve this problem by writing
books that would last, books that
would survive even though I wouldn’t.
But I eventually realized that is of
course a fool’s errand. Books also
don’t live forever and anyway, that’s
not why books exist. They exist to be
helpful to the people who find them.
And then my next idea was that even
if my work couldn’t last, my legacy
could through philanthropy, like I would
build up this huge charitable trust
and then once it was really big, it
would start donating 5% of its
resources per year or whatever to create
charities and then my impact would
stretch through the years. The problem
with this strategy is that I was still
trying to maintain some kind of
control or agency that would survive
even after my body didn’t, right?
Also I was conveniently forgetting
the fact that if you donate money now,
it’s true that it no longer grows under
your control, but it still grows. It grows
in the form of more kids surviving
to adulthood, and more people having
educational opportunities and so on.
And that growth is actually much
more transformational and important
than like the appreciation of stocks.
Now I want to be clear that I insulate
myself from precarity in as many
ways as possible, like I quit smoking
20 years ago because it was making
my life more precarious, I have
insurance to make life less precarious,
and I have financial security which
makes a billion things less stressful
and more possible from taking
professional risks, to getting my
kids any support they need.
And of course it’s human, wonderfully
human, to try to protect those we
love, there’s nothing wrong with that.
But one thing I have noticed over
the years is that when rich people
only spend time with other rich people,
they do not feel rich, they feel normal.
And this arrives at what I really don’t
like about the people who have
enough, it is so easy to forget that
we have enough. In fact, let me
stop using “we” and start using “I.”
I forget that I have enough because
in trying to insulate myself from precarity
I can also make myself distanced
from the reality of suffering. And if I
was more proximal to that suffering,
I would use more of my resources to
try and alleviate it. And too often trying
to insulate myself and those I love from
the realities of suffering, I am also
looking away from injustice and inequity
and impoverishment. And if having
enough means having enough to not
have to face those realities, then
enough is simply too much.
Hank, I’ll see you on Friday.